<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-4-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</b></p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, it’s become the talk of all the town,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make a stir that’s scarcely to your credit;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I have met you, sir, most opportunely,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tell you in a word my frank opinion.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not to sift out this scandal to the bottom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suppose the worst for us⁠—suppose Damis</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Acted the traitor, and accused you falsely;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should not a Christian pardon this offence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And stifle in his heart all wish for vengeance?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should you permit that, for your petty quarrel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A son be driven from his father’s house?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I tell you yet again, and tell you frankly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Everyone, high or low, is scandalised;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If you’ll take my advice, you’ll make it up,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not push matters to extremities.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make sacrifice to God of your resentment;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Restore the son to favour with his father.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas! So far as I’m concerned, how gladly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I do so! I bear him no ill will;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I pardon all, lay nothing to his charge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wish with all my heart that I might serve him;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But Heaven’s interests cannot allow it;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If he returns, then I must leave the house.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>After his conduct, quite unparalleled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All intercourse between us would bring scandal;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God knows what everyone’s first thought would be!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They would attribute it to merest scheming</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On my part⁠—say that conscious of my guilt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I feigned a Christian love for my accuser,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But feared him in my heart, and hoped to win him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And underhandedly secure his silence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>You try to put us off with specious phrases;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But all your arguments are too far-fetched.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why take upon yourself the cause of Heaven?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Does Heaven need our help to punish sinners?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leave to itself the care of its own vengeance,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And keep in mind the pardon it commands us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Besides, think somewhat less of men’s opinions,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When you are following the will of Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall petty fear of what the world may think</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prevent the doing of a noble deed?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No!⁠—let us always do as Heaven commands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not perplex our brains with further questions.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Already I have told you I forgive him;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that is doing, sir, as Heaven commands.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But after this day’s scandal and affront</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heaven does not order me to live with him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And does it order you to lend your ear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To what mere whim suggested to his father,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to accept gift of his estates,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On which, in justice, you can make no claim?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No one who knows me, sir, can have the thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I am acting from a selfish motive.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The goods of this world have no charms for me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am not dazzled by their treacherous glamour;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if I bring myself to take the gift</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which he insists on giving me, I do so,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tell the truth, only because I fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This whole estate may fall into bad hands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And those to whom it comes may use it ill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And not employ it, as is my design,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Heaven’s glory and my neighbours’ good.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Eh, sir, give up these conscientious scruples</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That well may cause a rightful heir’s complaints.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Don’t take so much upon yourself, but let him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Possess what’s his, at his own risk and peril;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Consider, it were better he misused it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than you should be accused of robbing him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am astounded that unblushingly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You could allow such offers to be made!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell me⁠—has true religion any maxim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That teaches us to rob the lawful heir?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If Heaven has made it quite impossible</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Damis and you should live together here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were it not better you should quietly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And honourably withdraw, than let the son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be driven out for your sake, dead against</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All reason? ’Twould be giving, sir, believe me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such an example of your probity⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sir, it is half-past three; certain devotions</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Recall me to my closet; you’ll forgive me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For leaving you so soon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante (alone)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariane</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</b></p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine (to Cleante)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sir, we beg you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To help us all you can in her behalf;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She’s suffering almost more than heart can bear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This match her father means to make to-night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drives her each moment to despair. He’s coming.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us unite our efforts now, we beg you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And try by strength or skill to change his purpose.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariane</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</b></p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So ho! I’m glad to find you all together.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">(To Mariane)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here is the contract that shall make you happy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My dear. You know already what it means.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariane (on her knees before Orgon)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Father, I beg you, in the name of Heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That knows my grief, and by whate’er can move you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Relax a little your paternal rights,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And free my love from this obedience!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, do not make me, by your harsh command,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Complain to Heaven you ever were my father;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do not make wretched this poor life you gave me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If, crossing that fond hope which I had formed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You’ll not permit me to belong to one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom I have dared to love, at least, I beg you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon my knees, oh, save me from the torment</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of being possessed by one whom I abhor!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And do not drive me to some desperate act</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By exercising all your rights upon me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon (a little touched)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come, come, my heart, be firm! no human weakness!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariane</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am not jealous of your love for him;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Display it freely; give him your estate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if that’s not enough, add all of mine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I willingly agree, and give it up,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If only you’ll not give him me, your daughter;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, rather let a convent’s rigid rule</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wear out the wretched days that Heaven allots me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>These girls are ninnies!⁠—always turning nuns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When fathers thwart their silly love-affairs.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Get on your feet! The more you hate to have him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The more ’twill help you earn your soul’s salvation.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So, mortify your senses by this marriage,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And don’t vex me about it any more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But what⁠ ⁠… ?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>You hold your tongue, before your betters.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Don’t dare to say a single word, I tell you.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If you will let me answer, and advise⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Brother, I value your advice most highly;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis well thought out; no better can be had;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But you’ll allow me⁠—not to follow it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire (to her husband)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I can’t find words to cope with such a case;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your blindness makes me quite astounded at you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You are bewitched with him, to disbelieve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The things we tell you happened here to-day.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am your humble servant, and can see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Things, when they’re plain as noses on folks’ faces,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know you’re partial to my rascal son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And didn’t dare to disavow the trick</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He tried to play on this poor man; besides,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You were too calm, to be believed; if that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had happened, you’d have been far more disturbed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And must our honour always rush to arms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At the mere mention of illicit love?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or can we answer no attack upon it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Except with blazing eyes and lips of scorn?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For my part, I just laugh away such nonsense;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ve no desire to make a loud to-do.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our virtue should, I think, be gentle-natured;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor can I quite approve those savage prudes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose honour arms itself with teeth and claws</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tear men’s eyes out at the slightest word.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heaven preserve me from that kind of honour!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I like my virtue not to be a vixen,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I believe a quiet cold rebuff</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No less effective to repulse a lover.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know⁠ ⁠… and you can’t throw me off the scent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Once more, I am astounded at your weakness;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I wonder what your unbelief would answer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If I should let you see we’ve told the truth?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>See it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nonsense.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come! If I should find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A way to make you see it clear as day?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All rubbish.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What a man! But answer me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’m not proposing now that you believe us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But let’s suppose that here, from proper hiding,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You should be made to see and hear all plainly;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What would you say then, to your man of virtue?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, then, I’d say⁠ ⁠… say nothing. It can’t be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Your error has endured too long already,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And quite too long you’ve branded me a liar.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must at once, for my own satisfaction,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make you a witness of the things we’ve told you.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Amen! I take you at your word. We’ll see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What tricks you have, and how you’ll keep your promise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire (to Dorine)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Send him to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine (to Elmire)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The man’s a crafty codger,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perhaps you’ll find it difficult to catch him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire (to Dorine)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh no! A lover’s never hard to cheat,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And self-conceit leads straight to self-deceit.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bid him come down to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">(To Cleante and Mariane)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And you, withdraw.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b></p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bring up this table, and get under it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One essential is to hide you well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why under there?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh, dear! Do as I say;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know what I’m about, as you shall see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Get under, now, I tell you; and once there</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be careful no one either sees or hears you.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’m going a long way to humour you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must say; but I’ll see you through your scheme.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And then you’ll have, I think, no more to say.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">(To her husband, who is now under the table.)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But mind, I’m going to meddle with strange matters;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prepare yourself to be in no wise shocked.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whatever I may say must pass, because</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis only to convince you, as I promised.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By wheedling speeches, since I’m forced to do it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll make this hypocrite put off his mask,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flatter the longings of his shameless passion,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And give free play to all his impudence.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, since ’tis for your sake, to prove to you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His guilt, that I shall feign to share his love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I can leave off as soon as you’re convinced,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And things shall go no farther than you choose.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So, when you think they’ve gone quite far enough,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is for you to stop his mad pursuit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To spare your wife, and not expose me farther</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than you shall need, yourself, to undeceive you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It is your own affair, and you must end it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When⁠ ⁠… Here he comes. Keep still, don’t show yourself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b> (under the table)</p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They told me that you wished to see me here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes. I have secrets for your ear alone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But shut the door first, and look everywhere</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For fear of spies.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">(Tartuffe goes and closes the door, and comes back.)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We surely can’t afford</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another scene like that we had just now;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was ever anyone so caught before!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Damis did frighten me most terribly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On your account; you saw I did my best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To baffle his design, and calm his anger.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I was so confused, I never thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To contradict his story; still, thank Heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Things turned out all the better, as it happened,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now we’re on an even safer footing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The high esteem you’re held in, laid the storm;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My husband can have no suspicion of you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And even insists, to spite the scandal-mongers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That we shall be together constantly;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So that is how, without the risk of blame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I can be here locked up with you alone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And can reveal to you my heart, perhaps</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only too ready to allow your passion.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Your words are somewhat hard to understand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Madam; just now you used a different style.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If that refusal has offended you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How little do you know a woman’s heart!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How ill you guess what it would have you know,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When it presents so feeble a defence!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Always, at first, our modesty resists</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tender feelings you inspire us with.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whatever cause we find to justify</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The love that masters us, we still must feel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some little shame in owning it; and strive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make as though we would not, when we would.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But from the very way we go about it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We let a lover know our heart surrenders,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The while our lips, for honour’s sake, oppose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our heart’s desire, and in refusing promise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’m telling you my secret all too freely</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with too little heed to modesty.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But⁠—now that I’ve made bold to speak⁠—pray tell me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should I have tried to keep Damis from speaking,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should I have heard the offer of your heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So quietly, and suffered all your pleading,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And taken it just as I did⁠—remember⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If such a declaration had not pleased me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, when I tried my utmost to persuade you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not to accept the marriage that was talked of,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What should my earnestness have hinted to you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If not the interest that you’ve inspired,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And my chagrin, should such a match compel me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To share a heart I want all to myself?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis, past a doubt, the height of happiness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hear such words from lips we dote upon;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their honeyed sweetness pours through all my senses</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long draughts of suavity ineffable.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart employs its utmost zeal to please you,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And counts your love its one beatitude;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet that heart must beg that you allow it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To doubt a little its felicity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I well might think these words an honest trick</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make me break off this approaching marriage;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if I may express myself quite plainly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot trust these too enchanting words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until the granting of some little favour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I sigh for, shall assure me of their truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And build within my soul, on firm foundations,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A lasting faith in your sweet charity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire (coughing to draw her husband’s attention)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What! Must you go so fast?⁠—and all at once</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Exhaust the whole love of a woman’s heart?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She does herself the violence to make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This dear confession of her love, and you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are not yet satisfied, and will not be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without the granting of her utmost favours?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The less a blessing is deserved, the less</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We dare to hope for it; and words alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can ill assuage our love’s desires. A fate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Too full of happiness, seems doubtful still;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We must enjoy it ere we can believe it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I, who know how little I deserve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your goodness, doubt the fortunes of my daring;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So I shall trust to nothing, madam, till</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You have convinced my love by something real.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! How your love enacts the tyrant’s role,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And throws my mind into a strange confusion!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With what fierce sway it rules a conquered heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And violently will have its wishes granted!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What! Is there no escape from your pursuit?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No respite even?⁠—not a breathing space?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, is it decent to be so exacting,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so abuse by urgency the weakness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You may discover in a woman’s heart?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But if my worship wins your gracious favour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then why refuse me some sure proof thereof?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But how can I consent to what you wish,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without offending Heaven you talk so much of?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If Heaven is all that stands now in my way,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll easily remove that little hindrance;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your heart need not hold back for such a trifle.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But they affright us so with Heaven’s commands!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I can dispel these foolish fears, dear madam;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I know the art of pacifying scruples</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heaven forbids, ’tis true, some satisfactions;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But we find means to make things right with Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<p>(’Tis a scoundrel speaking.)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></p>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">There is a science, madam, that instructs us</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How to enlarge the limits of our conscience</span>
								<br/>
								<span>According to our various occasions,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And rectify the evil of the deed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>According to our purity of motive.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll duly teach you all these secrets, madam;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You only need to let yourself be guided.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Content my wishes, have no fear at all;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I answer for’t, and take the sin upon me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">(Elmire coughs still louder.)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Your cough is very bad.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, I’m in torture.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Would you accept this bit of licorice?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The case is obstinate, I find; and all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The licorice in the world will do no good.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis very trying.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>More than words can say.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In any case, your scruple’s easily</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Removed. With me you’re sure of secrecy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there’s no harm unless a thing is known.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The public scandal is what brings offence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And secret sinning is not sin at all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire (after coughing again)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So then, I see I must resolve to yield;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must consent to grant you everything,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cannot hope to give full satisfaction</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or win full confidence, at lesser cost.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No doubt ’tis very hard to come to this;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis quite against my will I go so far;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But since I must be forced to it, since nothing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That can be said suffices for belief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since more convincing proof is still demanded,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I must make up my mind to humour people.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If my consent give reason for offence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So much the worse for him who forced me to it;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fault can surely not be counted mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It need not, madam; and the thing itself⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Open the door, I pray you, and just see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether my husband’s not there, in the hall.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why take such care for him? Between ourselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He is a man to lead round by the nose.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He’s capable of glorying in our meetings;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ve fooled him so, he’d see all, and deny it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No matter; go, I beg you, look about,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And carefully examine every corner.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b></p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon (crawling out from under the table)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That is, I own, a man⁠ ⁠… abominable!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I can’t get over it; the whole thing floors me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What? You come out so soon? You cannot mean it!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Get back under the table; ’tis not time yet;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wait till the end, to see, and make quite certain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And don’t believe a thing on mere conjecture.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nothing more wicked e’er came out of Hell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dear me! Don’t go and credit things too lightly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, let yourself be thoroughly convinced;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Don’t yield too soon, for fear you’ll be mistaken.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<p id="id00630">(As Tartuffe enters, she makes her husband stand behind her.)</p>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-7" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b></p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe (not seeing Orgon)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All things conspire toward my satisfaction,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Madam, I’ve searched the whole apartment through.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There’s no one here; and now my ravished soul⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon (stopping him)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Softly! You are too eager in your amours;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You needn’t be so passionate. Ah ha!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My holy man! You want to put it on me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How is your soul abandoned to temptation!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Marry my daughter, eh?⁠—and want my wife, too?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I doubted long enough if this was earnest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Expecting all the time the tone would change;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now the proof’s been carried far enough;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’m satisfied, and ask no more, for my part.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire (to Tartuffe)</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twas quite against my character to play</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This part; but I was forced to treat you so.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What? You believe⁠ ⁠… ?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Come, now, no protestations.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Get out from here, and make no fuss about it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But my intent⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That talk is out of season.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You leave my house this instant.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tartuffe</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>You’re the one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To leave it, you who play the master here!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This house belongs to me, I’ll have you know,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And show you plainly it’s no use to turn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To these low tricks, to pick a quarrel with me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that you can’t insult me at your pleasure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I have wherewith to confound your lies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Avenge offended Heaven, and compel</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those to repent who talk to me of leaving.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-8" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b></p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What sort of speech is this? What can it mean?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My faith, I’m dazed. This is no laughing matter.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From his words I see my great mistake;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The deed of gift is one thing troubles me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The deed of gift⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, that is past recall.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I’ve another thing to make me anxious.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What’s that?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>You shall know all. Let’s see at once</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether a certain box is still upstairs.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
