<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Flipotte</b>, her servant; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariane</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, Flipotte, and let me get away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You hurry so, I hardly can attend you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then don’t, my daughter-in law. Stay where you are.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I can dispense with your polite attentions.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We’re only paying what is due you, mother.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why must you go away in such a hurry?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because I can’t endure your carryings-on,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And no one takes the slightest pains to please me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I leave your house, I tell you, quite disgusted;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You do the opposite of my instructions;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ve no respect for anything; each one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must have his say; it’s perfect pandemonium.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You’re a servant wench, my girl, and much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too full of gab, and too impertinent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And free with your advice on all occasions.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You’re a fool, my boy⁠—f, o, o, l</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Just spells your name. Let grandma tell you that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ve said a hundred times to my poor son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your father, that you’d never come to good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or give him anything but plague and torment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariane</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I think⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O dearie me, his little sister!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’re all demureness, butter wouldn’t melt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In your mouth, one would think to look at you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still waters, though, they say⁠ ⁠… you know the proverb;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I don’t like your doings on the sly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, mother⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Daughter, by your leave, your conduct</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In everything is altogether wrong;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You ought to set a good example for ’em;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their dear departed mother did much better.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are extravagant; and it offends me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see you always decked out like a princess.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman who would please her husband’s eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alone, wants no such wealth of fineries.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, madam, after all⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, as for you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lady’s brother, I esteem you highly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love and respect you. But, sir, all the same,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I were in my son’s, her husband’s, place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’d urgently entreat you not to come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within our doors. You preach a way of living</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That decent people cannot tolerate.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’m rather frank with you; but that’s my way⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I don’t mince matters, when I mean a thing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tartuffe, your friend, is mighty lucky⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He is a holy man, and must be heeded;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I can’t endure, with any show of patience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear a scatterbrains like you attack him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What! Shall I let a bigot criticaster</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come and usurp a tyrant’s power here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shall we never dare amuse ourselves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till this fine gentleman deigns to consent?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If we must hark to him, and heed his maxims,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s not a thing we do but what’s a crime;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He censures everything, this zealous carper.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And all he censures is well censured, too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He wants to guide you on the way to heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My son should train you all to love him well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, madam, look you, nothing⁠—not my father</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor anything⁠—can make me tolerate him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should belie my feelings not to say so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His actions rouse my wrath at every turn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I foresee that there must come of it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An open rupture with this sneaking scoundrel.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Besides, ’tis downright scandalous to see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This unknown upstart master of the house⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This vagabond, who hadn’t, when he came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shoes to his feet, or clothing worth six farthings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who so far forgets his place, as now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To censure everything, and rule the roost!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Eh! Mercy sakes alive! Things would go better</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If all were governed by his pious orders.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He passes for a saint in your opinion.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In fact, he’s nothing but a hypocrite.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Just listen to her tongue!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I wouldn’t trust him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor yet his Lawrence, without bonds and surety.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I don’t know what the servant’s character</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May be; but I can guarantee the master</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A holy man. You hate him and reject him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because he tells home truths to all of you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis sin alone that moves his heart to anger,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And heaven’s interest is his only motive.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of course. But why, especially of late,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can he let nobody come near the house?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is heaven offended at a civil call</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he should make so great a fuss about it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll tell you, if you like, just what I think;</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pointing to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>.</i> Upon my word, he’s jealous of our mistress.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You hold your tongue, and think what you are saying.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s not alone in censuring these visits;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The turmoil that attends your sort of people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their carriages forever at the door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all their noisy footmen, flocked together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Annoy the neighbourhood, and raise a scandal.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’d gladly think there’s nothing really wrong;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But it makes talk; and that’s not as it should be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Eh! madam, can you hope to keep folk’s tongues</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From wagging? It would be a grievous thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If, for the fear of idle talk about us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We had to sacrifice our friends. No, no;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even if we could bring ourselves to do it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think you that everyone would then be silenced?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against backbiting there is no defence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So let us try to live in innocence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To silly tattle pay no heed at all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leave the gossips free to vent their gall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our neighbour Daphne, and her little husband,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must be the ones who slander us, I’m thinking.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those whose own conduct’s most ridiculous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are always quickest to speak ill of others;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They never fail to seize at once upon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The slightest hint of any love affair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spread the news of it with glee, and give it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The character they’d have the world believe in.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By others’ actions, painted in their colours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They hope to justify their own; they think,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the false hope of some resemblance, either</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make their own intrigues seem innocent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else to make their neighbours share the blame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which they are loaded with by everybody.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These arguments are nothing to the purpose.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Orante, we all know, lives a perfect life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her thoughts are all of heaven; and I have heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she condemns the company you keep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O admirable pattern! Virtuous dame!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She lives the model of austerity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But age has brought this piety upon her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she’s a prude, now she can’t help herself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As long as she could capture men’s attentions</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She made the most of her advantages;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, now she sees her beauty vanishing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She wants to leave the world, that’s leaving her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the specious veil of haughty virtue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She’d hide the weakness of her worn-out charms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is the way with all your old coquettes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They find it hard to see their lovers leave ’em;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus abandoned, their forlorn estate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can find no occupation but a prude’s.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These pious dames, in their austerity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must carp at everything, and pardon nothing.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They loudly blame their neighbours’ way of living,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not for religion’s sake, but out of envy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because they can’t endure to see another</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enjoy the pleasures age has weaned them from.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Madame Pernelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>.</i> There! That’s the kind of rigmarole to please you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Daughter-in-law. One never has a chance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To get a word in edgewise, at your house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because this lady holds the floor all day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But none the less, I mean to have my say, too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I tell you that my son did nothing wiser</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all his life, than take this godly man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into his household; heaven sent him here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In your great need, to make you all repent;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For your salvation, you must hearken to him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He censures nothing but deserves his censure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These visits, these assemblies, and these balls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are all inventions of the evil spirit.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You never hear a word of godliness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At them⁠—but idle cackle, nonsense, flimflam.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our neighbour often comes in for a share,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The talk flies fast, and scandal fills the air;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It makes a sober person’s head go round,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At these assemblies, just to hear the sound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of so much gab, with not a word to say;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as a learned man remarked one day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most aptly, ’tis the Tower of Babylon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where all, beyond all limit, babble on.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And just to tell you how this point came in⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>.</i> So! Now the gentlemen must snicker, must he?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go find fools like yourself to make you laugh</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And don’t⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>.</i> Daughter, goodbye; not one word more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for this house, I leave the half unsaid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I shan’t soon set foot in it again,</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cuffing <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Flipotte</b>.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Come, you! What makes you dream and stand agape,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hussy! I’ll warm your ears in proper shape!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>March, trollop, march!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I won’t escort her down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For fear she might fall foul of me again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The good old lady⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bless us! What a pity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She shouldn’t hear the way you speak of her!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She’d surely tell you you’re too “good” by half,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that she’s not so “old” as all that, neither!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How she got angry with us all for nothing!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And how she seems possessed with her Tartuffe!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Her case is nothing, though, beside her son’s!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To see him, you would say he’s ten times worse!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>His conduct in our late unpleasantness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
										<br/>
										<span>Had won him much esteem, and proved his courage</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In service of his king; but now he’s like</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A man besotted, since he’s been so taken</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With this Tartuffe. He calls him brother, loves him</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A hundred times as much as mother, son,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Daughter, and wife. He tells him all his secrets</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And lets him guide his acts, and rule his conscience.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He fondles and embraces him; a sweetheart</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Could not, I think, be loved more tenderly;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>At table he must have the seat of honour,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>While with delight our master sees him eat</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As much as six men could; we must give up</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The choicest tidbits to him; if he belches,</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">’tis a servant speaking.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Master exclaims: “God bless you!”⁠—Oh, he dotes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Upon him! he’s his universe, his hero;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He’s lost in constant admiration, quotes him</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On all occasions, takes his trifling acts</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For wonders, and his words for oracles.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The fellow knows his dupe, and makes the most on’t,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He fools him with a hundred masks of virtue,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Gets money from him all the time by canting,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And takes upon himself to carp at us.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Even his silly coxcomb of a lackey</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Makes it his business to instruct us too;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He comes with rolling eyes to preach at us,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And throws away our ribbons, rouge, and patches.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The wretch, the other day, tore up a kerchief</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That he had found, pressed in the <i>Golden Legend</i>,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Calling it a horrid crime for us to mingle</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The devil’s finery with holy things.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariane</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elmire</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>.</i> You’re very lucky to have missed the speech</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She gave us at the door. I see my husband</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is home again. He hasn’t seen me yet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I’ll go up and wait till he comes in.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And I, to save time, will await him here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll merely say good morning, and be gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Damis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I wish you’d say a word to him about</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sister’s marriage; I suspect Tartuffe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Opposes it, and puts my father up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To all these wretched shifts. You know, besides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How nearly I’m concerned in it myself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If love unites my sister and Valere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I love his sister too; and if this marriage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were to⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He’s coming.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah! Good morning, brother.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I was just going, but am glad to greet you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Things are not far advanced yet, in the country?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dorine⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">(To Cleante)</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Just wait a bit, please, brother-in-law.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me allay my first anxiety</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By asking news about the family.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">(To Dorine)</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Has everything gone well these last two days?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What’s happening? And how is everybody?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam had fever, and a splitting headache</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Day before yesterday, all day and evening.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And how about Tartuffe?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tartuffe? He’s well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s mighty well; stout, fat, fair, rosy-lipped.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor man!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>At evening she had nausea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And couldn’t touch a single thing for supper,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her headache still was so severe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And how</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About Tartuffe?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He supped alone, before her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And unctuously ate up two partridges,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As well as half a leg o’ mutton, deviled.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor man!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All night she couldn’t get a wink</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of sleep, the fever racked her so; and we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had to sit up with her till daylight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About Tartuffe?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Gently inclined to slumber,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He left the table, went into his room,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Got himself straight into a good warm bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And slept quite undisturbed until next morning.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor man!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>At last she let us all persuade her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And got up courage to be bled; and then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She was relieved at once.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And how about</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tartuffe?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He plucked up courage properly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bravely entrenched his soul against all evils,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to replace the blood that she had lost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He drank at breakfast four huge draughts of wine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor man!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dorine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So now they both are doing well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I’ll go straightway and inform my mistress</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How pleased you are at her recovery.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother, she ridicules you to your face;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I, though I don’t want to make you angry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must tell you candidly that she’s quite right.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was such infatuation ever heard of?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And can a man today have charms to make you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forget all else, relieve his poverty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give him a home, and then⁠ ⁠… ?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stop there, good brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You do not know the man you’re speaking of.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Since you will have it so, I do not know him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But after all, to tell what sort of man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dear brother, you’d be charmed to know him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your raptures over him would have no end.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is a man⁠ ⁠… who⁠ ⁠… ah!⁠ ⁠… in fact⁠ ⁠… a man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whoever does his will, knows perfect peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And counts the whole world else, as so much dung.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His converse has transformed me quite; he weans</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart from every friendship, teaches me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have no love for anything on earth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I could see my brother, children, mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wife, all die, and never care⁠—a snap.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your feelings are humane, I must say, brother!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah! If you’d seen him, as I saw him first,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You would have loved him just as much as I.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He came to church each day, with contrite mien,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kneeled, on both knees, right opposite my place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And drew the eyes of all the congregation,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To watch the fervour of his prayers to heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With deep-drawn sighs and great ejaculations,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He humbly kissed the earth at every moment;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when I left the church, he ran before me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give me holy water at the door.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I learned his poverty, and who he was,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By questioning his servant, who is like him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gave him gifts; but in his modesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He always wanted to return a part.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“It is too much,” he’d say, “too much by half;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not worthy of your pity.” Then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I refused to take it back, he’d go,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before my eyes, and give it to the poor.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At length heaven bade me take him to my home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And since that day, all seems to prosper here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He censures everything, and for my sake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He even takes great interest in my wife;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He lets me know who ogles her, and seems</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Six times as jealous as I am myself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’d not believe how far his zeal can go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He calls himself a sinner just for trifles;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The merest nothing is enough to shock him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So much so, that the other day I heard him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accuse himself for having, while at prayer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In too much anger caught and killed a flea.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Zounds, brother, you are mad, I think! Or else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’re making sport of me, with such a speech.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What are you driving at with all this nonsense⁠ ⁠… ?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother, your language smacks of atheism;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I suspect your soul’s a little tainted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therewith. I’ve preached to you a score of times</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you’ll draw down some judgment on your head.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That is the usual strain of all your kind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They must have everyone as blind as they.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They call you atheist if you have good eyes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if you don’t adore their vain grimaces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ve neither faith nor care for sacred things.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, no; such talk can’t frighten me; I know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I am saying; heaven sees my heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’re not the dupes of all your canting mummers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There are false heroes⁠—and false devotees;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as true heroes never are the ones</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who make much noise about their deeds of honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Just so true devotees, whom we should follow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not the ones who make so much vain show.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What! Will you find no difference between</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hypocrisy and genuine devoutness?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will you treat them both alike, and pay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The selfsame honour both to masks and faces</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set artifice beside sincerity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confuse the semblance with reality,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Esteem a phantom like a living person,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And counterfeit as good as honest coin?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men, for the most part, are strange creatures, truly!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You never find them keep the golden mean;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The limits of good sense, too narrow for them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must always be passed by, in each direction;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They often spoil the noblest things, because</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They go too far, and push them to extremes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I merely say this by the way, good brother.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You are the sole expounder of the doctrine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wisdom shall die with you, no doubt, good brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are the only wise, the sole enlightened,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The oracle, the Cato, of our age.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All men, compared to you, are downright fools.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’m not the sole expounder of the doctrine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wisdom shall not die with me, good brother.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But this I know, though it be all my knowledge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That there’s a difference ’twixt false and true.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as I find no kind of hero more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be admired than men of true religion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nothing more noble or more beautiful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than is the holy zeal of true devoutness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Just so I think there’s naught more odious</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than whited sepulchres of outward unction,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those barefaced charlatans, those hireling zealots,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose sacrilegious, treacherous pretence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deceives at will, and with impunity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes mockery of all that men hold sacred;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men who, enslaved to selfish interests,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make trade and merchandise of godliness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And try to purchase influence and office</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With false eye-rollings and affected raptures;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those men, I say, who with uncommon zeal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seek their own fortunes on the road to heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, skilled in prayer, have always much to ask,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And live at court to preach retirement;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who reconcile religion with their vices,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are quick to anger, vengeful, faithless, tricky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, to destroy a man, will have the boldness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To call their private grudge the cause of heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All the more dangerous, since in their anger</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They use against us weapons men revere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And since they make the world applaud their passion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And seek to stab us with a sacred sword.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There are too many of this canting kind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still, the sincere are easy to distinguish;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And many splendid patterns may be found,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In our own time, before our very eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look at Ariston, Periandre, Oronte,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alcidamas, Clitandre, and Polydore;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No one denies their claim to true religion;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet they’re no braggadocios of virtue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They do not make insufferable display,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And their religion’s human, tractable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They are not always judging all our actions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They’d think such judgment savoured of presumption;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, leaving pride of words to other men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis by their deeds alone they censure ours.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Evil appearances find little credit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With them; they even incline to think the best</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of others. No caballers, no intriguers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They mind the business of their own right living.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They don’t attack a sinner tooth and nail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For sin’s the only object of their hatred;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor are they overzealous to attempt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far more in heaven’s behalf than heaven would have ’em.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is my kind of man, that is true living,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is the pattern we should set ourselves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your fellow was not fashioned on this model;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’re quite sincere in boasting of his zeal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But you’re deceived, I think, by false pretences.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My dear good brother-in-law, have you quite done?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’m your humble servant.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Starts to go.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Just a word.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll drop that other subject. But you know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Valere has had the promise of your daughter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You had named the happy day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then why put off the celebration of it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I can’t say.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can you have some other plan</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In mind?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Perhaps.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You mean to break your word?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I don’t say that.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I hope no obstacle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can keep you from performing what you’ve promised.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, that depends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why must you beat about?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Valere has sent me here to settle matters.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Heaven be praised!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What answer shall I take him?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, anything you please.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But we must know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your plans. What are they?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I shall do the will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Heaven.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, be serious. You’ve given</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your promise to Valere. Now will you keep it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orgon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Goodbye.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cleante (alone)</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His love, methinks, has much to fear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must go let him know what’s happening here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
